# MLB-Build-a-Team

# Data and Analysis Project: MLB Build a Team
- Tim Seymour (seymour.ti@northeastern.edu)

## Project Goal:
The goal is to be able to predict how many wins any combination of players would have over a 162 game season. As a baseball fanatic, I myself have always wanted a tool to see how much a team can expect to improve from a free agency move or a trade, so I decided to create something to do just that. My hope for this project is that baseball fans like me will be able to determine what a player might do for their team given their statistics from the most recent season.

<a id='data'></a>

## Data
I will obtain statcast statistics such as:

wrc+, BsR, DRS/162, FIP, K-BB%

# Hypotheses

The statistics that will be most useful in predicting MLB win totals will be advanced statistics
 - In many cases these control for ballpark, strength of opponent, and other factors that eliminate luck

The model will have an R squared value greater than .6
 - Baseball statistics may be better evaluations of individual player performance than stats in any other sport because there are fewer players connected to each play (an At-Bat in this case).
 - A priority of mine in developing the win prediction model is making sure only to include statistics that can be aggregated given a set of players from different teams.

Baserunning will not have much weight in the Linear Regression Model
 - Although baserunning is an aspect of the game that can give one team an advantage over another, it is something that is often sacrificed in roster construction in the interest of prioritizing hitting. 
 - Teams like the Rays with top-of-the-line analytics departments dominate baserunning, however, so in the coming years I expect this to shift

## Results:
** Team win totals reflect the wins for rosters generated by the find_players_on_team function. It should be noted that these rosters are from perfect as some teams lacked qualified players at each position. These totals also tend to be higher because an assumption being made is that only the best players at each position will play and every player will be at full health the whole season. For this reason, the mean of the win projections is 89.5 which is impossibly high, though better teams tend to have higher win totals.

<bound method DataFrame.to_markdown of            Wins
ARI   72.616549
ATL   95.691464
BAL   70.772950
BOS   98.246656
CHC   63.797207
CHW  109.542495
CIN   89.781505
CLE   80.010586
COL   79.737762
DET   84.718220
MIA   73.019397
HOU  101.575703
KCR   90.037588
LAA   87.643858
LAD  114.910223
MIL  103.262370
MIN   94.325441
NYM   94.349587
NYY   93.688073
OAK   93.399321
PHI   87.738033
PIT   75.801187
SDP   98.455432
SFG  100.842498
SEA   89.418096
STL   97.218709
TBR  112.029057
TEX   66.999841
TOR  100.309515
WSN   63.589723>

# Conclusion/Revisiting Hypotheses
The statistics that will be most useful in predicting MLB win totals will be advanced statistics:
 - Though slightly better representative than counting stats, there was not as extreme of a difference as I had expected. Recursive Feature Elimination even selected homeruns over WRC+ which account for the value of a homerun

The model will have an R squared value greater than .6
 - The R squared value was about .73 which I found to be outstanding results. Like no other sport, baseball has easily aggregated advanced statistics that are actually representative of their performance.

Baserunning will not have much weight in the Linear Regression Model
 - Baserunning had limited correlation with win percentage as was expected

# Limitations/Areas in need of improvement
- This model does not take into account the fact that you need more than 9 hitters and 10 pitchers - depth is an incredibly important part of building a winning team. One potential improvement to fix this limitation would be to build a function that allows the user to input how many games each player will play and adjust the aggregation function accordingly.
